Iulia Militaru
No Language for Old Men


(There once was a fiddler who lived in a velvety/ sewer,/ and tried to make sense in this terrible world/ of all the hard life, always hard/  to live in a velvety sewer. The fiddler/ would play his old fiddle, and wonder, and wonder.)

Then I saw
	the Red Round Sun Rise
or 		only a half did I see
(the other unseen)	semicircle burning on the water
In a Station of a Metron 	The apparition of these
Voices
in the crowd		a thousand and one voices

Still silence rules: But where are all the others?

(here in the dark sounds change all the time, and I have to get them, understand them; I will then speak their tongue and they shall listen to me; my words were begotten by hunger, words that expect bounty)
And I play, while my violin catches fire, all blazes
Shedding scorching light into the deep
A lady with a baby asleep	gives me a penny
A fierce beast,/ scares me to death:/ my verse is drowsy;
Today, though, I have food

If only it weren’t all so silent – is there anybody who can hear me?
Est-ce que vous avez vu des autres – des camarades – avec des singes ou des ours?
If only we spoke the same language – would anyone 
Have you seen any others, any of our lot,/ With apes and bears?

One day, indeed, I heard him say
Under his breath, but near
That we could live in a dead tongue
Like spoken ones, for sure:
And we’ll live in the living one
Like in the one that’s dead.
And	he spat up flames of fire
And	he greedily sucked them back.
Then a new consensus came
A new voice, clear, more clear.
		Thus sang then the new fiddler:

“Brightness combing its dark hair, oh, its pitch dark hair,
Up in a Ferentari palace packed with rigs ‘n’ piles of dough.
Last night when the cheeky moon danced its way out of her den
She checked out her Romeo and then cried: “My God, you’re swell!
Ar’n’tch you one big rare treat—ain’t no other on the block!
All so cool an’ on the booze, cocky cockeyed with crazy looks.
Come, come over, jolly geezer,
Climb up to my balcony,
Let me kiss you on the kisser
While my nanny’s outta here!
Fly me to the moon above, com’on love, let’s make the love!

But, soft! What light through yonder window breaks?
It is the east, and Shine is the sun! – 
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief,
That thou her maid art far more fair than she.

Meraptuki! Mertapuki!
Oh, your godly aureole
Calls from depth of heart and soul:
Come to me with sins and all
Deep in wine we’ll dive and roll
Hugging tight we’ll croak and fall!

Is it even so? Then I defy you, stars!
Meraptuki! Mertapuki!
Oh, my godly aureole
Calls from depth of heart and soul:
Here I come with sins and all
Deep in wine we’ll dive and roll
Hugging tight we’ll croak and fall!

O Romeo, Romeo! Wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father, and refuse thy names;
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
And I’ll no longer be a Gypsy.


I 			picked up my violin			
And cried  		“Letter from o living language!”

So fragile we just touch our words
Almost charred, back from the dead,
It sounds all sacred sounds around
Dancing on our music’s strings.

My long awaited silence vast
Is killed now by the rising voices,
All so fragile.  And I touch the words
Almost charred, back from the dead.

We now depart, sail out at sea.
To Byzantium, returning in confidence
Among old drinks.  Oh the fragrance
Of mead dripping from goblets incessantly
All so fragile, yet so alive in the words.

“My dear friend,
it’s me, the fiddler of Dooney,
most famous one in the county,/ some would say.
People dance like the sea
when my fiddle starts to weep…
The priest of Kilvarnet is my kin
and my brother’s down in Mocharabuiee.
So now, along with you
I’ll passionately join the chorus:

Oh how I miss, I can’t miss more
My brothers up in Labrador
I’ll die of longing		just can’t miss more
					My brothers up in Labrador!

(Er aber sucht noch in absinthenen Meeren
Wenn ihn schon seine Mutter vergisst
Grinsend und fluchend und zuweilen nicht ohne Zähren
Immer das Land, wo es besser zu leben ist.)

All I can remember is the moment
I found myself here, mesmerized by those shop window lights:
Red jade cups, food well set on a blue jewelled table,
And I was drunk, and had no thought of returning,
And I couldn’t remember anything at all and had no free-
end to call; so I said to myself: remembrance-phobia is what those without me
mory suffer from, and I’d been hardheaded enough to listen to them, to be fri
ghtened by what I’d left behind, to believe that there wasn’t
any trace left
		afterwards
				there was nothing
	left this place	these words		this voice
				nothing
						left behind 	from before.

And for the first time, it dawned on the moon she’s all alone.

But now you tell me that I finally speak plainly,
You tell me how our voices intertwine
Urging me to set out together with you at sea.
But I still wonder should I...
				...to Byzantium?
There is no language for old men, 
				my dear friend!

I don’t know, 
				but we are still young...


[translated from the Romanian by Chris Tanasescu]

